 An "Attic" Philosopher, entire by Emile Souvestre - Full Text Free Book (Part 
2/3) A:hover {color: #808000}   




      An "Attic" Philosopher, entire
      by
      Emile Souvestre

      Part 2 out of 3
        FullBooks.com homepage
        Index of An "Attic" Philosopher, entire
        Previous part (1)
        Next part (3)

      <!-- google_ad_client = "pub-5788426211617053"; google_alternate_ad_url = 
      "http://www.fullbooks.com/google_adsense_script.html"; google_ad_width = 
      336; google_ad_height = 280; google_ad_format = "336x280_as";
       google_ad_channel ="9351046134"; google_color_border = "FFFFFF";
       google_color_bg = "FFFFFF"; google_color_link = "0000FF";
       google_color_url = "008000"; google_color_text = "000000"; //--> 

       

       A ray of the rising sun lights up the little table on which I write; the
       breeze brings me in the scent of the mignonette, and the swallows wheel
       about my window with joyful twitterings. The image of my Uncle Maurice
       will be in its proper place amid the songs, the sunshine, and the
       fragrance.


       Seven o'clock.--It is with men's lives as with days: some dawn radiant
       with a thousand colors, others dark with gloomy clouds. That of my Uncle
       Maurice was one of the latter. He was so sickly, when he came into the
       world, that they thought he must die; but notwithstanding these
       anticipations, which might be called hopes, he continued to live,
       suffering and deformed.

       He was deprived of all joys as well as of all the attractions of
       childhood. He was oppressed because he was weak, and laughed at for his
       deformity. In vain the little hunchback opened his arms to the world:
       the world scoffed at him, and went its way.

       However, he still had his mother, and it was to her that the child
       directed all the feelings of a heart repelled by others. With her he
       found shelter, and was happy, till he reached the age when a man must
       take his place in life; and Maurice had to content himself with that
       which others had refused with contempt. His education would have
       qualified him for any course of life; and he became an octroi-clerk--
       [The octroi is the tax on provisions levied at the entrance of the town]
       --in one of the little toll-houses at the entrance of his native town.

       He was always shut up in this dwelling of a few feet square, with no
       relaxation from the office accounts but reading and his mother's visits.
       On fine summer days she came to work at the door of his hut, under the
       shade of a clematis planted by Maurice. And, even when she was silent,
       her presence was a pleasant change for the hunchback; he heard the
       clinking of her long knitting-needles; he saw her mild and mournful
       profile, which reminded him of so many courageously-borne trials; he
       could every now and then rest his hand affectionately on that bowed neck,
       and exchange a smile with her!

       This comfort was soon to be taken from him. His old mother fell sick,
       and at the end of a few days he had to give up all hope. Maurice was
       overcome at the idea of a separation which would henceforth leave him
       alone on earth, and abandoned himself to boundless grief. He knelt by
       the bedside of the dying woman, he called her by the fondest names, he
       pressed her in his arms, as if he could so keep her in life. His mother
       tried to return his caresses, and to answer him; but her hands were cold,
       her voice was already gone. She could only press her lips against the
       forehead of her son, heave a sigh, and close her eyes forever!

       They tried to take Maurice away, but he resisted them and threw himself
       on that now motionless form.

       "Dead!" cried he; "dead! She who had never left me, she who was the
       only one in the world who loved me! You, my mother, dead! What then
       remains for me here below?"

       A stifled voice replied:

       "God!"

       Maurice, startled, raised himself! Was that a last sigh from the dead,
       or his own conscience, that had answered him? He did not seek to know,
       but he understood the answer, and accepted it.

       It was then that I first knew him. I often went to see him in his little
       toll-house. He joined in my childish games, told me his finest stories,
       and let me gather his flowers. Deprived as he was of all external
       attractiveness, he showed himself full of kindness to all who came to
       him, and, though he never would put himself forward, he had a welcome for
       everyone. Deserted, despised, he submitted to everything with a gentle
       patience; and while he was thus stretched on the cross of life, amid the
       insults of his executioners, he repeated with Christ, "Father, forgive
       them, for they know not what they do."

       No other clerk showed so much honesty, zeal, and intelligence; but those
       who otherwise might have promoted him as his services deserved were
       repelled by his deformity. As he had no patrons, he found his claims
       were always disregarded. They preferred before him those who were better
       able to make themselves agreeable, and seemed to be granting him a favor
       when letting him keep the humble office which enabled him to live. Uncle
       Maurice bore injustice as he had borne contempt; unfairly treated by men,
       he raised his eyes higher, and trusted in the justice of Him who cannot
       be deceived.

       He lived in an old house in the suburb, where many work-people, as poor
       but not as forlorn as he, also lodged. Among these neighbors there was a
       single woman, who lived by herself in a little garret, into which came
       both wind and rain. She was a young girl, pale, silent, and with nothing
       to recommend her but her wretchedness and her resignation to it. She was
       never seen speaking to any other woman, and no song cheered her garret.
       She worked without interest and without relaxation; a depressing gloom
       seemed to envelop her like a shroud. Her dejection affected Maurice; he
       attempted to speak to her; she replied mildly, but in few words. It was
       easy to see that she preferred her silence and her solitude to the little
       hunchback's good-will; he perceived it, and said no more.

       But Toinette's needle was hardly sufficient for her support, and
       presently work failed her! Maurice learned that the poor girl was in
       want of everything, and that the tradesmen refused to give her credit.
       He immediately went to them privately and engaged to pay them for what
       they supplied Toinette with.

       Things went on in this way for several months. The young dressmaker
       continued out of work, until she was at last frightened at the bills she
       had contracted with the shopkeepers. When she came to an explanation
       with them, everything was discovered. Her first impulse was to run to
       Uncle Maurice, and thank him on her knees. Her habitual reserve had
       given way to a burst of deepest feeling. It seemed as if gratitude had
       melted all the ice of that numbed heart.

       Being now no longer embarrassed with a secret, the little hunchback could
       give greater efficacy to his good offices. Toinette became to him a
       sister, for whose wants he had a right to provide. It was the first time
       since the death of his mother that he had been able to share his life
       with another. The young woman received his attentions with feeling, but
       with reserve. All Maurice's efforts were insufficient to dispel her
       gloom: she seemed touched by his kindness, and sometimes expressed her
       sense of it with warmth; but there she stopped. Her heart was a closed
       book, which the little hunchback might bend over, but could not read. In
       truth he cared little to do so; he gave himself up to the happiness of
       being no longer alone, and took Toinette such as her long trials had made
       her; he loved her as she was, and wished for nothing else but still to
       enjoy her company.

       This thought insensibly took possession of his mind, to the exclusion of
       all besides. The poor girl was as forlorn as himself; she had become
       accustomed to the deformity of the hunchback, and she seemed to look on
       him with an affectionate sympathy! What more could he wish for? Until
       then, the hopes of making himself acceptable to a helpmate had been
       repelled by Maurice as a dream; but chance seemed willing to make it a
       reality. After much hesitation he took courage, and decided to speak to
       her.

       It was evening; the little hunchback, in much agitation, directed his
       steps toward the work-woman's garret just as he was about to enter, he
       thought he heard a strange voice pronouncing the maiden's name. He
       quickly pushed open the door, and perceived Toinette weeping, and leaning
       on the shoulder of a young man in the dress of a sailor.

       At the sight of my uncle, she disengaged herself quickly, and ran to him,
       crying out:

       "Ah! come in--come in! It is he that I thought was dead: it is Julien;
       it is my betrothed!"

       Maurice tottered, and drew back. A single word had told him all!

       It seemed to him as if the ground shook and his heart was about to break;
       but the same voice that he had heard by his mother's deathbed again
       sounded in his ears, and he soon recovered himself. God was still his
       friend!

       He himself accompanied the newly-married pair on the road when they left
       the town, and, after wishing them all the happiness which was denied to
       him, he returned with resignation to the old house in the suburb.

       It was there that he ended his life, forsaken by men, but not as he said
       by the Father which is in heaven. He felt His presence everywhere; it
       was to him in the place of all else. When he died, it was with a smile,
       and like an exile setting out for his own country. He who had consoled
       him in poverty and ill-health, when he was suffering from injustice and
       forsaken by all, had made death a gain and blessing to him.


       Eight o'clock.--All I have just written has pained me! Till now I have
       looked into life for instruction how to live. Is it then true that human
       maxims are not always sufficient? that beyond goodness, prudence,
       moderation, humility, self-sacrifice itself, there is one great truth,
       which alone can face great misfortunes? and that, if man has need of
       virtues for others, he has need of religion for himself?

       When, in youth, we drink our wine with a merry heart, as the Scripture
       expresses it, we think we are sufficient for ourselves; strong, happy,
       and beloved, we believe, like Ajax, we shall be able to escape every
       storm in spite of the gods. But later in life, when the back is bowed,
       when happiness proves a fading flower, and the affections grow chill-
       then, in fear of the void and the darkness, we stretch out our arms, like
       the child overtaken by night, and we call for help to Him who is
       everywhere.

       I was asking this morning why this growing confusion alike for society
       and for the individual? In vain does human reason from hour to hour
       light some new torch on the roadside: the night continues to grow ever
       darker! Is it not because we are content to withdraw farther and farther
       from God, the Sun of spirits?

       But what do these hermit's reveries signify to the world? The inward
       turmoils of most men are stifled by the outward ones; life does not give
       them time to question themselves. Have they time to know what they are,
       and what they should be, whose whole thoughts are in the next lease or
       the last price of stock? Heaven is very high, and wise men look only at
       the earth.

       But I--poor savage amid all this civilization, who seek neither power nor
       riches, and who have found in my own thoughts the home and shelter of my
       spirit--I can go back with impunity to these recollections of my
       childhood; and, if this our great city no longer honors the name of God
       with a festival, I will strive still to keep the feast to Him in my
       heart.




       CHAPTER VII

       THE PRICE OF POWER AND THE WORTH OF FAME

       Sunday, July 1st

       Yesterday the month dedicated to Juno (Junius, June) by the Romans ended.
       To-day we enter on July.

       In ancient Rome this latter month was called Quintiles (the fifth),
       because the year, which was then divided into only ten parts, began in
       March. When Numa Pompilius divided it into twelve months this name of
       Quintiles was preserved, as well as those that followed--Sexteles,
       September, October, November, December--although these designations did
       not accord with the newly arranged order of the months. At last, after a
       time the month Quintiles, in which Julius Caesar was born, was called
       Julius, whence we have July. Thus this name, placed in the calendar, is
       become the imperishable record of a great man; it is an immortal epitaph
       on Time's highway, engraved by the admiration of man.

       How many similar inscriptions are there! Seas, continents, mountains,
       stars, and monuments, have all in succession served the same purpose! We
       have turned the whole world into a Golden Book, like that in which the
       state of Venice used to enroll its illustrious names and its great deeds.
       It seems that mankind feels a necessity for honoring itself in its elect
       ones, and that it raises itself in its own eyes by choosing heroes from
       among its own race. The human family love to preserve the memory; of the
       parvenus of glory, as we cherish that of a great ancestor, or of a
       benefactor.

       In fact, the talents granted to a single individual do not benefit
       himself alone, but are gifts to the world; everyone shares them, for
       everyone suffers or benefits by his actions. Genius is a lighthouse,
       meant to give light from afar; the man who bears it is but the rock upon
       which this lighthouse is built.

       I love to dwell upon these thoughts; they explain to me in what consists
       our admiration for glory. When glory has benefited men, that admiration
       is gratitude; when it is only remarkable in itself, it is the pride of
       race; as men, we love to immortalize the most shining examples of
       humanity.

       Who knows whether we do not obey the same instinct in submitting to the
       hand of power? Apart from the requirements of a gradation of ranks, or
       the consequences of a conquest, the multitude delight to surround their
       chiefs with privileges--whether it be that their vanity makes them thus
       to aggrandize one of their own creations, or whether they try to conceal
       the humiliation of subjection by exaggerating the importance of those who
       rule them. They wish to honor themselves through their master; they
       elevate him on their shoulders as on a pedestal; they surround him with a
       halo of light, in order that some of it may be reflected upon themselves.
       It is still the fable of the dog who contents himself with the chain and
       collar, so that they are of gold.

       This servile vanity is not less natural or less common than the vanity of
       dominion. Whoever feels himself incapable of command, at least desires
       to obey a powerful chief. Serfs have been known to consider themselves
       dishonored when they became the property of a mere count after having
       been that of a prince, and Saint-Simon mentions a valet who would only
       wait upon marquises.


       July 7th, seven o'clock P. M.--I have just now been up the Boulevards;
       it was the opera night, and there was a crowd of carriages in the Rue
       Lepelletier. The foot-passengers who were stopped at a crossing
       recognized the persons in some of these as we went by, and mentioned
       their names; they were those of celebrated or powerful men, the
       successful ones of the day.

       Near me there was a man looking on with hollow cheeks and eager eyes,
       whose thin black coat was threadbare. He followed with envious looks
       these possessors of the privileges of power or of fame, and I read on his
       lips, which curled with a bitter smile, all that passed in his mind.

       "Look at them, the lucky fellows!" thought he; "all the pleasures of
       wealth, all the enjoyments of pride, are theirs. Their names are
       renowned, all their wishes fulfilled; they are the sovereigns of the
       world, either by their intellect or their power; and while I, poor and
       unknown, toil painfully along the road below, they wing their way over
       the mountain-tops gilded by the broad sunshine of prosperity."

       I have come home in deep thought. Is it true that there are these
       inequalities, I do not say in the fortunes, but in the happiness of men?
       Do genius and authority really wear life as a crown, while the greater
       part of mankind receive it as a yoke? Is the difference of rank but a
       different use of men's dispositions and talents, or a real inequality in
       their destinies? A solemn question, as it regards the verification of
       God's impartiality.


       July 8th, noon.--I went this morning to call upon a friend from the same
       province as myself, who is the first usher-in-waiting to one of our
       ministers. I took him some letters from his family, left for him by a
       traveller just come from Brittany. He wished me to stay.

       "To-day," said he, "the Minister gives no audience: he takes a day of
       rest with his family. His younger sisters are arrived; he will take them
       this morning to St. Cloud, and in the evening he has invited his friends
       to a private ball. I shall be dismissed directly for the rest of the
       day. We can dine together; read the news while you are waiting for me."

       I sat down at a table covered with newspapers, all of which I looked over
       by turns. Most of them contained severe criticisms on the last political
       acts of the minister; some of them added suspicions as to the honor of
       the minister himself.

       Just as I had finished reading, a secretary came for them to take them to
       his master.

       He was then about to read these accusations, to suffer silently the abuse
       of all those tongues which were holding him up to indignation or to
       scorn! Like the Roman victor in his triumph, he had to endure the
       insults of him who followed his car, relating to the crowd his follies,
       his ignorance, or his vices.

       But, among the arrows shot at him from every side, would no one be found
       poisoned? Would not one reach some spot in his heart where the wound
       would be incurable? What is the worth of a life exposed to the attacks
       of envious hatred or furious conviction? The Christians yielded only the
       fragments of their flesh to the beasts of the amphitheatres; the man in
       power gives up his peace, his affections, his honor, to the cruel bites
       of the pen.

       While I was musing upon these dangers of greatness, the usher entered
       hastily. Important news had been received: the minister is just summoned
       to the council; he will not be able to take his sisters to St. Cloud.

       I saw, through the windows, the young ladies, who were waiting at the
       door, sorrowfully go upstairs again, while their brother went off to the
       council. The carriage, which should have gone filled with so much family
       happiness, is just out of sight, carrying only the cares of a statesman
       in it.

       The usher came back discontented and disappointed. The more or less of
       liberty which he is allowed to enjoy, is his barometer of the political
       atmosphere. If he gets leave, all goes well; if he is kept at his post,
       the country is in danger. His opinion on public affairs is but a
       calculation of his own interest. My friend is almost a statesman.

       I had some conversation with him, and he told me several curious
       particulars of public life.

       The new minister has old friends whose opinions he opposes, though he
       still retains his personal regard for them. Though separated from them
       by the colors he fights under, they remain united by old associations;
       but the exigencies of party forbid him to meet them. If their
       intercourse continued, it would awaken suspicion; people would imagine
       that some dishonorable bargain was going on; his friends would be held to
       be traitors desirous to sell themselves, and he the corrupt minister
       prepared to buy them. He has, therefore, been obliged to break off
       friendships of twenty years' standing, and to sacrifice attachments which
       had become a second nature.

       Sometimes, however, the minister still gives way to his old feelings; he
       receives or visits his friends privately; he shuts himself up with them,
       and talks of the times when they could be open friends. By dint of
       precautions they have hitherto succeeded in concealing this blot of
       friendship against policy; but sooner or later the newspapers will be
       informed of it, and will denounce him to the country as an object of
       distrust.

       For whether hatred be honest or dishonest, it never shrinks from any
       accusation. Sometimes it even proceeds to crime. The usher assured me
       that several warnings had been given the minister which had made him fear
       the vengeance of an assassin, and that he no longer ventured out on foot.

       Then, from one thing to another, I learned what temptations came in to
       mislead or overcome his judgment; how he found himself fatally led into
       obliquities which he could not but deplore. Misled by passion, over-
       persuaded by entreaties, or compelled for reputation's sake, he has many
       times held the balance with an unsteady hand. How sad the condition of
       him who is in authority! Not only are the miseries of power imposed upon
       him, but its vices also, which, not content with torturing, succeed in
       corrupting him.

       We prolonged our conversation till it was interrupted by the minister's
       return. He threw himself out of the carriage with a handful of papers,
       and with an anxious manner went into his own room. An instant afterward
       his bell was heard; his secretary was called to send off notices to all
       those invited for the evening; the ball would not take place; they spoke
       mysteriously of bad news transmitted by the telegraph, and in such
       circumstances an entertainment would seem to insult the public sorrow.

       I took leave of my friend, and here I am at home. What I have just seen
       is an answer to my doubts the other day. Now I know with what pangs men
       pay for their dignities; now I understand

       That Fortune sells what we believe she gives.

       This explains to me the reason why Charles V aspired to the repose of the
       cloister.

       And yet I have only glanced at some of the sufferings attached to power.
       What shall I say of the falls in which its possessors are precipitated
       from the heights of heaven to the very depths of the earth? of that path
       of pain along which they must forever bear the burden of their
       responsibility? of that chain of decorums and ennuis which encompasses
       every act of their lives, and leaves them so little liberty?

       The partisans of despotism adhere with reason to forms and ceremonies.
       If men wish to give unlimited power to their fellow-man, they must keep
       him separated from ordinary humanity; they must surround him with a
       continual worship, and, by a constant ceremonial, keep up for him the
       superhuman part they have granted him. Our masters cannot remain
       absolute, except on condition of being treated as idols.

       But, after all, these idols are men, and, if the exclusive life they must
       lead is an insult to the dignity of others, it is also a torment to
       themselves. Everyone knows the law of the Spanish court, which used to
       regulate, hour by hour, the actions of the king and queen; "so that,"
       says Voltaire, "by reading it one can tell all that the sovereigns of
       Spain have done, or will do, from Philip II to the day of judgment." It
       was by this law that Philip III, when sick, was obliged to endure such an
       excess of heat that he died in consequence, because the Duke of Uzeda,
       who alone had the right to put out the fire in the royal chamber,
       happened to be absent.

       When the wife of Charles II was run away with on a spirited horse, she
       was about to perish before anyone dared to save her, because etiquette
       forbade them to touch the queen. Two young officers endangered their
       lives for her by stopping the horse. The prayers and tears of her whom
       they had just snatched from death were necessary to obtain pardon for
       their crime. Every one knows the anecdote related by Madame Campan of
       Marie Antoinette, wife of Louis XVI. One day, being at her toilet, when
       the chemise was about to be presented to her by one of the assistants, a
       lady of very ancient family entered and claimed the honor, as she had the
       right by etiquette; but, at the moment she was about to fulfil her duty,
       a lady of higher rank appeared, and in her turn took the garment she was
       about to offer to the queen; when a third lady of still higher title came
       in her turn, and was followed by a fourth, who was no other than the
       king's sister. The chemise was in this manner passed from hand to hand,
       with ceremonies, courtesies, and compliments, before it came to the
       queen, who, half naked and quite ashamed, was shivering with cold for the
       great honor of etiquette.


       12th, seven o'clock, P.M.--On coming home this evening, I saw, standing
       at the door of a house, an old man, whose appearance and features
       reminded me of my father. There was the same beautiful smile, the same
       deep and penetrating eye, the same noble bearing of the head, and the
       same careless attitude.

       I began living over again the first years of my life, and recalling to
       myself the conversations of that guide whom God in his mercy had given
       me, and whom in his severity he had too soon withdrawn.

       When my father spoke, it was not only to bring our two minds together by
       an interchange of thought, but his words always contained instruction.

       Not that he endeavored to make me feel it so: my father feared everything
       that had the appearance of a lesson. He used to say that virtue could
       make herself devoted friends, but she did not take pupils: therefore he
       was not desirous to teach goodness; he contented himself with sowing the
       seeds of it, certain that experience would make them grow.

       How often has good grain fallen thus into a corner of the heart, and,
       when it has been long forgotten, all at once put forth the blade and come
       into ear! It is a treasure laid aside in a time of ignorance, and we do
       not know its value till we find ourselves in need of it.

       Among the stories with which he enlivened our walks or our evenings,
       there is one which now returns to my memory, doubtless because the time
       is come to derive its lesson from it.

       My father, who was apprenticed at the age of twelve to one of those
       trading collectors who call themselves naturalists, because they put all
       creation under glasses that they may sell it by retail, had always led a
       life of poverty and labor. Obliged to rise before daybreak, by turns
       shop-boy, clerk, and laborer, he was made to bear alone all the work of a
       trade of which his master reaped all the profits. In truth, this latter
       had a peculiar talent for making the most of the labor of other people.
       Though unfit himself for the execution of any kind of work, no one knew
       better how to sell it. His words were a net, in which people found
       themselves taken before they were aware. And since he was devoted to
       himself alone, and looked on the producer as his enemy, and the buyer as
       prey, he used them both with that obstinate perseverance which avarice
       teaches.

       My father was a slave all the week, and could call himself his own only
       on Sunday. The master naturalist, who used to spend the day at the house
       of an old female relative, then gave him his liberty on condition that he
       dined out, and at his own expense. But my father used secretly to take
       with him a crust of bread, which he hid in his botanizing-box, and,
       leaving Paris as soon as it was day, he would wander far into the valley
       of Montmorency, the wood of Meudon, or among the windings of the Marne.
       Excited by the fresh air, the penetrating perfume of the growing
       vegetation, or the fragrance of the honeysuckles, he would walk on until
       hunger or fatigue made itself felt. Then he would sit under a hedge, or
       by the side of a stream, and would make a rustic feast, by turns on
       watercresses, wood strawberries, and blackberries picked from the hedges;
       he would gather a few plants, read a few pages of Florian, then in
       greatest vogue, of Gessner, who was just translated, or of Jean Jacques,
       of whom he possessed three old volumes. The day was thus passed
       alternately in activity and rest, in pursuit and meditation, until the
       declining sun warned him to take again the road to Paris, where he would
       arrive, his feet torn and dusty, but his mind invigorated for a whole
       week.

       One day, as he was going toward the wood of Viroflay, he met, close to
       it, a stranger who was occupied in botanizing and in sorting the plants
       he had just gathered. He was an elderly man with an honest face; but his
       eyes, which were rather deep-set under his eyebrows, had a somewhat
       uneasy and timid expression. He was dressed in a brown cloth coat, a
       gray waistcoat, black breeches, and worsted stockings, and held an ivory-
       headed cane under his arm. His appearance was that of a small retired
       tradesman who was living on his means, and rather below the golden mean
       of Horace.

       My father, who had great respect for age, civilly raised his hat to him
       as he passed. In doing so, a plant he held fell from his hand; the
       stranger stooped to take it up, and recognized it.

       "It is a Deutaria heptaphyllos," said he; "I have not yet seen any of
       them in these woods; did you find it near here, sir?"

       My father replied that it was to be found in abundance on the top of the
       hill, toward Sevres, as well as the great Laserpitium.

       "That, too!" repeated the old man more briskly. "Ah! I shall go and
       look for them; I have gathered them formerly on the hillside of Robaila."

       My father proposed to take him. The stranger accepted his proposal with
       thanks, and hastened to collect together the plants he had gathered; but
       all of a sudden he appeared seized with a scruple. He observed to his
       companion that the road he was going was halfway up the hill, and led in
       the direction of the castle of the Dames Royales at Bellevue; that by
       going to the top he would consequently turn out of his road, and that it
       was not right he should take this trouble for a stranger.

       My father insisted upon it with his habitual good-nature; but, the more
       eagerness he showed, the more obstinately the old man refused; it even
       seemed to my father that his good intention at last excited his
       suspicion. He therefore contented himself with pointing out the road to
       the stranger, whom he saluted, and he soon lost sight of him.

       Many hours passed by, and he thought no more of the meeting. He had
       reached the copses of Chaville, where, stretched on the ground in a mossy
       glade, he read once more the last volume of Emile. The delight of
       reading it had so completely absorbed him that he had ceased to see or
       hear anything around him. With his cheeks flushed and his eyes moist,
       he repeated aloud a passage which had particularly affected him.

       An exclamation uttered close by him awoke him from his ecstasy; he raised
       his head, and perceived the tradesman-looking person he had met before on
       the crossroad at Viroflay.

       He was loaded with plants, the collection of which seemed to have put him
       into high good-humor.

       "A thousand thanks, sir," said he to my father. "I have found all that
       you told me of, and I am indebted to you for a charming walk."

       My father respectfully rose, and made a civil reply. The stranger had
       grown quite familiar, and even asked if his young "brother botanist" did
       not think of returning to Paris. My father replied in the affirmative,
       and opened his tin box to put his book back in it.

       The stranger asked him with a smile if he might without impertinence ask
       the name of it. My father answered that it was Rousseau's Emile.

       The stranger immediately became grave.

       They walked for some time side by side, my father expressing, with the
       warmth of a heart still throbbing with emotion, all that this work had
       made him feel; his companion remaining cold and silent. The former
       extolled the glory of the great Genevese writer, whose genius had made
       him a citizen of the world; he expatiated on this privilege of great
       thinkers, who reign in spite of time and space, and gather together a
       people of willing subjects out of all nations; but the stranger suddenly
       interrupted him:

       "And how do you know," said he, mildly, "whether Jean Jacques would not
       exchange the reputation which you seem to envy for the life of one of the
       wood-cutters whose chimneys' smoke we see? What has fame brought him
       except persecution? The unknown friends whom his books may have made for
       him content themselves with blessing him in their hearts, while the
       declared enemies that they have drawn upon him pursue him with violence
       and calumny! His pride has been flattered by success: how many times has
       it been wounded by satire? And be assured that human pride is like the
       Sybarite who was prevented from sleeping by a crease in a roseleaf. The
       activity of a vigorous mind, by which the world profits, almost always
       turns against him who possesses it. He expects more from it as he grows
       older; the ideal he pursues continually disgusts him with the actual; he
       is like a man who, with a too-refined sight, discerns spots and blemishes
       in the most beautiful face. I will not speak of stronger temptations and
       of deeper downfalls. Genius, you have said, is a kingdom; but what
       virtuous man is not afraid of being a king? He who feels only his great
       powers, is--with the weaknesses and passions of our nature--preparing for
       great failures. Believe me, sir, the unhappy man who wrote this book is
       no object of admiration or of envy; but, if you have a feeling heart,
       pity him!"

       My father, astonished at the excitement with which his companion
       pronounced these last words, did not know what to answer.

       Just then they reached the paved road which led from Meudon Castle to
       that of Versailles; a carriage was passing.

       The ladies who were in it perceived the old man, uttered an exclamation
       of surprise, and leaning out of the window repeated:

       "There is Jean Jacques--there is Rousseau!"

       Then the carriage disappeared in the distance.

       My father remained motionless, confounded, and amazed, his eyes wide
       open, and his hands clasped.

       Rousseau, who had shuddered on hearing his name spoken, turned toward
       him:

       "You see," said he, with the bitter misanthropy which his later
       misfortunes had produced in him, "Jean Jacques cannot even hide himself:
       he is an object of curiosity to some, of malignity to others, and to all
       he is a public thing, at which they point the finger. It would signify
       less if he had only to submit to the impertinence of the idle; but, as
       soon as a man has had the misfortune to make himself a name, he becomes
       public property. Every one rakes into his life, relates his most trivial
       actions, and insults his feelings; he becomes like those walls, which
       every passer-by may deface with some abusive writing. Perhaps you will
       say that I have myself encouraged this curiosity by publishing my
       Confessions. But the world forced me to it. They looked into my house
       through the blinds, and they slandered me; I have opened the doors and
       windows, so that they should at least know me such as I am. Adieu, sir.
       Whenever you wish to know the worth of fame, remember that you have seen
       Rousseau."


       Nine o'clock.--Ah! now I understand my father's story! It contains the
       answer to one of the questions I asked myself a week ago. Yes, I now
       feel that fame and power are gifts that are dearly bought; and that, when
       they dazzle the soul, both are oftenest, as Madame de Stael says, but 'un
       deuil eclatant de bonheur!

       'Tis better to be lowly born,
       And range with humble livers in content,
       Than to be perk'd up in a glistering grief,
       And wear a golden sorrow.

       [Henry VIII., Act II., Scene 3.]




       CHAPTER VIII

       MISANTHROPY AND REPENTANCE

       August 3d, Nine O'clock P.M.

       There are days when everything appears gloomy to us; the world, like the
       sky, is covered by a dark fog. Nothing seems in its place; we see only
       misery, improvidence, and cruelty; the world seems without God, and given
       up to all the evils of chance.

       Yesterday I was in this unhappy humor. After a long walk in the
       faubourgs, I returned home, sad and dispirited.

       Everything I had seen seemed to accuse the civilization of which we are
       so proud! I had wandered into a little by-street, with which I was not
       acquainted, and I found myself suddenly in the middle of those dreadful
       abodes where the poor are born, to languish and die. I looked at those
       decaying walls, which time has covered with a foul leprosy; those
       windows, from which dirty rags hang out to dry; those fetid gutters,
       which coil along the fronts of the houses like venomous reptiles!
       I felt oppressed with grief, and hastened on.

       A little farther on I was stopped by the hearse of a hospital; a dead
       man, nailed down in his deal coffin, was going to his last abode, without
       funeral pomp or ceremony, and without followers. There was not here even
       that last friend of the outcast--the dog, which a painter has introduced
       as the sole attendant at the pauper's burial! He whom they were
       preparing to commit to the earth was going to the tomb, as he had lived,
       alone; doubtless no one would be aware of his end. In this battle of
       society, what signifies a soldier the less?

       But what, then, is this human society, if one of its members can thus
       disappear like a leaf carried away by the wind?

       The hospital was near a barrack, at the entrance of which old men, women,
       and children were quarrelling for the remains of the coarse bread which
       the soldiers had given them in charity! Thus, beings like ourselves
       daily wait in destitution on our compassion till we give them leave to
       live! Whole troops of outcasts, in addition to the trials imposed on all
       God's children, have to endure the pangs of cold, hunger, and
       humiliation. Unhappy human commonwealth! Where man is in a worse
       condition than the bee in its hive, or the ant in its subterranean city!

       Ah! what then avails our reason? What is the use of so many high
       faculties, if we are neither the wiser nor the happier for them? Which
       of us would not exchange his life of labor and trouble with that of the
       birds of the air, to whom the whole world is a life of joy?

       How well I understand the complaint of Mao, in the popular tales of the
       'Foyer Breton' who, when dying of hunger and thirst, says, as he looks at
       the bullfinches rifling the fruit-trees:

       "Alas! those birds are happier than Christians; they have no need of
       inns, or butchers, or bakers, or gardeners. God's heaven belongs to
       them, and earth spreads a continual feast before them! The tiny flies
       are their game, ripe grass their cornfields, and hips and haws their
       store of fruit. They have the right of taking everywhere, without paying
       or asking leave: thus comes it that the little birds are happy, and sing
       all the livelong day!"

       But the life of man in a natural state is like that of the birds; he
       equally enjoys nature. "The earth spreads a continual feast before him."
       What, then, has he gained by that selfish and imperfect association which
       forms a nation? Would it not be better for every one to turn again to
       the fertile bosom of nature, and live there upon her bounty in peace and
       liberty?


       August 20th, four o'clock A.M.--The dawn casts a red glow on my bed-
       curtains; the breeze brings in the fragrance of the gardens below. Here
       I am again leaning on my elbows by the windows, inhaling the freshness
       and gladness of this first wakening of the day.

       My eye always passes over the roofs filled with flowers, warbling, and
       sunlight, with the same pleasure; but to-day it stops at the end of a
       buttress which separates our house from the next.

       The storms have stripped the top of its plaster covering, and dust
       carried by the wind has collected in the crevices, and, being fixed there
       by the rain, has formed a sort of aerial terrace, where some green grass
       has sprung up. Among it rises a stalk of wheat, which to-day is
       surmounted by a sickly ear that droops its yellow head.

       This poor stray crop on the roofs, the harvest of which will fall to the
       neighboring sparrows, has carried my thoughts to the rich crops which are
       now falling beneath the sickle; it has recalled to me the beautiful walks
       I took as a child through my native province, when the threshing-floors
       at the farmhouses resounded from every part with the sound of a flail,
       and when the carts, loaded with golden sheaves, came in by all the roads.
       I still remember the songs of the maidens, the cheerfulness of the old
       men, the open-hearted merriment of the laborers. There was, at that
       time, something in their looks both of pride and feeling. The latter
       came from thankfulness to God, the former from the sight of the harvest,
       the reward of their labor. They felt indistinctly the grandeur and the
       holiness of their part in the general work of the world; they looked with
       pride upon their mountains of corn-sheaves, and they seemed to say, Next
       to God, it is we who feed the world!

       What a wonderful order there is in all human labor!

       While the husbandman furrows his land, and prepares for every one his
       daily bread, the town artizan, far away, weaves the stuff in which he is
       to be clothed; the miner seeks underground the iron for his plow; the
       soldier defends him against the invader; the judge takes care that the
       law protects his fields; the tax-comptroller adjusts his private
       interests with those of the public; the merchant occupies himself in
       exchanging his products with those of distant countries; the men of
       science and of art add every day a few horses to this ideal team, which
       draws along the material world, as steam impels the gigantic trains of
       our iron roads! Thus all unite together, all help one another; the toil
       of each one benefits himself and all the world; the work has been
       apportioned among the different members of the whole of society by a
       tacit agreement. If, in this apportionment, errors are committed, if
       certain individuals have not been employed according to their capacities,
       those defects of detail diminish in the sublime conception of the whole.
       The poorest man included in this association has his place, his work, his
       reason for being there; each is something in the whole.

       There is nothing like this for man in the state of nature. As he depends
       only upon himself, it is necessary that he be sufficient for everything.
       All creation is his property; but he finds in it as many hindrances as
       helps. He must surmount these obstacles with the single strength that
       God has given him; he cannot reckon on any other aid than chance and
       opportunity. No one reaps, manufactures, fights, or thinks for him; he
       is nothing to any one. He is a unit multiplied by the cipher of his own
       single powers; while the civilized man is a unit multiplied by the whole
       of society.

       But, notwithstanding this, the other day, disgusted by the sight of some
       vices in detail, I cursed the latter, and almost envied the life of the
       savage.

       One of the infirmities of our nature is always to mistake feeling for
       evidence, and to judge of the season by a cloud or a ray of sunshine.

       Was the misery, the sight of which made me regret a savage life, really
       the effect of civilization? Must we accuse society of having created
       these evils, or acknowledge, on the contrary, that it has alleviated
       them? Could the women and children, who were receiving the coarse bread
       from the soldier, hope in the desert for more help or pity? That dead
       man, whose forsaken state I deplored, had he not found, by the cares of a
       hospital, a coffin and the humble grave where he was about to rest?
       Alone, and far from men, he would have died like the wild beast in his
       den, and would now be serving as food for vultures! These benefits of
       human society are shared, then, by the most destitute. Whoever eats the
       bread that another has reaped and kneaded, is under an obligation to his
       brother, and cannot say he owes him nothing in return. The poorest of us
       has received from society much more than his own single strength would
       have permitted him to wrest from nature.

       But cannot society give us more? Who doubts it? Errors have been
       committed in this distribution of tasks and workers. Time will diminish
       the number of them; with new lights a better division will arise; the
       elements of society go on toward perfection, like everything else. The
       difficulty is to know how to adapt ourselves to the slow step of time,
       whose progress can never be forced on without danger.


       August 14th, six o'clock A.M.--My garret window rises upon the roof like
       a massive watch-tower. The corners are covered by large sheets of lead,
       which run into the tiles; the successive action of cold and heat has made
       them rise, and so a crevice has been formed in an angle on the right
       side. There a sparrow has built her nest.

       I have followed the progress of this aerial habitation from the first
       day. I have seen the bird successively bring the straw, moss, and wool
       designed for the construction of her abode; and I have admired the
       persevering skill she expended in this difficult work. At first, my new
       neighbor spent her days in fluttering over the poplar in the garden, and
       in chirping along the gutters; a fine lady's life seemed the only one to
       suit her. Then all of a sudden, the necessity of preparing a shelter for
       her brood transformed our idler into a worker; she no longer gave herself
       either rest or relaxation. I saw her always either flying, fetching, or
       carrying; neither rain nor sun stopped her. A striking example of the
       power of necessity! We are indebted to it not only for most of our
       talents, but for many of our virtues!

       Is it not necessity that has given the people of less favored climates
       that constant activity which has placed them so quickly at the head of
       nations? As they are deprived of most of the gifts of nature, they have
       supplied them by their industry; necessity has sharpened their
       understanding, endurance awakened their foresight. While elsewhere man,
       warmed by an ever brilliant sun, and loaded with the bounties of the
       earth, was remaining poor, ignorant, and naked, in the midst of gifts he
       did not attempt to explore, here he was forced by necessity to wrest his
       food from the ground, to build habitations to defend himself from the
       intemperance of the weather, and to warm his body by clothing himself
       with the wool of animals. Work makes him both more intelligent and more
       robust: disciplined by it, he seems to mount higher on the ladder of
       creation, while those more favored by nature remain on the step nearest
       to the brutes.

       I made these reflections while looking at the bird, whose instinct seemed
       to have become more acute since she had been occupied in work. At last
       the nest was finished; she set up her household there, and I followed her
       through all the phases of her new existence.

       When she had sat on the eggs, and the young ones were hatched, she fed
       them with the most attentive care. The corner of my window had become a
       stage of moral action, which fathers and mothers might come to take
       lessons from. The little ones soon became large, and this morning I have
       seen them take their first flight. One of them, weaker than the others,
       was not able to clear the edge of the roof, and fell into the gutter. I
       caught him with some difficulty, and placed him again on the tile in
       front of his house, but the mother has not noticed him. Once freed from
       the cares of a family, she has resumed her wandering life among the trees
       and along the roofs. In vain I have kept away from my window, to take
       from her every excuse for fear; in vain the feeble little bird has called
       to her with plaintive cries; his bad mother has passed by, singing and
       fluttering with a thousand airs and graces. Once only the father came
       near; he looked at his offspring with contempt, and then disappeared,
       never to return!

       I crumbled some bread before the little orphan, but he did not know how
       to peck it with his bill. I tried to catch him, but he escaped into the
       forsaken nest. What will become of him there, if his mother does not
       come back!


       August 15th, six o'clock.--This morning, on opening my window, I found
       the little bird dying upon the tiles; his wounds showed me that he had
       been driven from the nest by his unworthy mother. I tried in vain to
       warm him again with my breath; I felt the last pulsations of life; his
       eyes were already closed, and his wings hung down! I placed him on the
       roof in a ray of sunshine, and I closed my window. The struggle of life
       against death has always something gloomy in it: it is a warning to us.

       Happily I hear some one in the passage; without doubt it is my old
       neighbor; his conversation will distract my thoughts.

       It was my portress. Excellent woman! She wished me to read a letter
       from her son the sailor, and begged me to answer it for her.

       I kept it, to copy it in my journal. Here it is:

       "DEAR MOTHER: This is to tell you that I have been very well ever
       since the last time, except that last week I was nearly drowned with
       the boat, which would have been a great loss, as there is not a
       better craft anywhere.

       "A gust of wind capsized us; and just as I came up above water, I
       saw the captain sinking. I went after him, as was my duty, and,
       after diving three times, I brought him to the surface, which
       pleased him much; for when we were hoisted on board, and he had
       recovered his senses, he threw his arms round my neck, as he would
       have done to an officer.

       "I do not hide from you, dear mother, that this has delighted me.
       But it isn't all; it seems that fishing up the captain has reminded
       them that I had a good character, and they have just told me that I
       am promoted to be a sailor of the first class! Directly I knew it,
       I cried out, 'My mother shall have coffee twice a day!' And really,
       dear mother, there is nothing now to hinder you, as I shall now have
       a larger allowance to send you.

       "I include by begging you to take care of yourself if you wish to do
       me good; for nothing makes me feel so well as to think that you want
       for nothing.

       "Your son, from the bottom of my heart,

       JACQUES."


       This is the answer that the portress dictated to me:

       "MY GOOD JACQUOT: It makes me very happy to see that your heart is
       still as true as ever, and that you will never shame those who have
       brought you up. I need not tell you to take care of your life,
       because you know it is the same as my own, and that without you,
       dear child, I should wish for nothing but the grave; but we are not
       bound to live, while we are bound to do our duty.

       "Do not fear for my health, good Jacques; I was never better! I do
       not grow old at all, for fear of making you unhappy. I want
       nothing, and I live like a lady. I even had some money over this
       year, and as my drawers shut very badly, I put it into the savings'
       bank, where I have opened an account in your name. So, when you
       come back, you will find yourself with an income. I have also
       furnished your chest with new linen, and I have knitted you three
       new sea-jackets.

       "All your friends are well. Your cousin is just dead, leaving his
       widow in difficulties. I gave her your thirty francs' remittance
       and said that you had sent it her; and the poor woman remembers you
       day and night in her prayers. So, you see, I have put that money in
       another sort of savings' bank; but there it is our hearts that get
       the interest.

       "Good-bye, dear Jacquot. Write to me often, and always remember the
       good God, and your old mother,

       "PHROSINE MILLOT."


       Good son, and worthy mother! how such examples bring us back to a love
       for the human race! In a fit of fanciful misanthropy, we may envy the
       fate of the savage, and prefer that of the bird to such as he; but
       impartial observation soon does justice to such paradoxes. We find, on
       examination, that in the mixed good and evil of human nature, the good so
       far abounds that we are not in the habit of noticing it, while the evil
       strikes us precisely on account of its being the exception. If nothing
       is perfect, nothing is so bad as to be without its compensation or its
       remedy. What spiritual riches are there in the midst of the evils of
       society! how much does the moral world redeem the material!

       That which will ever distinguish man from the rest of creation, is his
       power of deliberate affection and of enduring self-sacrifice. The mother
       who took care of her brood in the corner of my window devoted to them the
       necessary time for accomplishing the laws which insure the preservation
       of her kind; but she obeyed an instinct, and not a rational choice. When
       she had accomplished the mission appointed her by Providence, she cast
       off the duty as we get rid of a burden, and she returned again to her
       selfish liberty. The other mother, on the contrary, will go on with her
       task as long as God shall leave her here below: the life of her son will
       still remain, so to speak, joined to her own; and when she disappears
       from the earth, she will leave there that part of herself.

       Thus, the affections make for our species an existence separate from all
       the rest of creation. Thanks to them, we enjoy a sort of terrestrial
       immortality; and if other beings succeed one another, man alone
       perpetuates himself.




       CHAPTER IX

       THE FAMILY OF MICHAEL AROUT

       September 15th, Eight O'clock

       This morning, while I was arranging my books, Mother Genevieve came in,
       and brought me the basket of fruit I buy of her every Sunday. For the
       nearly twenty years that I have lived in this quarter, I have dealt in
       her little fruit-shop. Perhaps I should be better served elsewhere, but
       Mother Genevieve has but little custom; to leave her would do her harm,
       and cause her unnecessary pain. It seems to me that the length of our
       acquaintance has made me incur a sort of tacit obligation to her; my
       patronage has become her property.

       She has put the basket upon my table, and as I want her husband, who is a
       joiner, to add some shelves to my bookcase, she has gone downstairs again
       immediately to send him to me.

       At first I did not notice either her looks or the sound of her voice:
       but, now that I recall them, it seems to me that she was not as jovial as
       usual. Can Mother Genevieve be in trouble about anything?

       Poor woman! All her best years were subject to such bitter trials, that
       she might think she had received her full share already. Were I to live
       a hundred years, I should never forget the circumstances which made her
       known to me, and which obtained for her my respect.

       It was at the time of my first settling in the faubourg. I had noticed
       her empty fruit-shop, which nobody came into, and, being attracted by its
       forsaken appearance, I made my little purchases in it. I have always
       instinctively preferred the poor shops; there is less choice in them, but
       it seems to me that my purchase is a sign of sympathy with a brother in
       poverty. These little dealings are almost always an anchor of hope to
       those whose very existence is in peril--the only means by which some
       orphan gains a livelihood. There the aim of the tradesman is not to
       enrich himself, but to live! The purchase you make of him is more than
       an exchange--it is a good action.

       Mother Genevieve at that time was still young, but had already lost that
       fresh bloom of youth which suffering causes to wither so soon among the
       poor. Her husband, a clever joiner, gradually left off working to
       become, according to the picturesque expression of the workshops, a
       worshipper of Saint Monday. The wages of the week, which was always
       reduced to two or three working days, were completely dedicated by him to
       the worship of this god of the Barriers,--[The cheap wine shops are
       outside the Barriers, to avoid the octroi, or municipal excise.]--and
       Genevieve was obliged herself to provide for all the wants of the
       household.

       One evening, when I went to make some trifling purchases of her, I heard
       a sound of quarrelling in the back shop. There were the voices of
       several women, among which I distinguished that of Genevieve, broken by
       sobs. On looking farther in, I perceived the fruit-woman holding a child
       in her arms, and kissing it, while a country nurse seemed to be claiming
       her wages from her. The poor woman, who without doubt had exhausted
       every explanation and every excuse, was crying in silence, and one of her
       neighbors was trying in vain to appease the countrywoman. Excited by
       that love of money which the evils of a hard peasant life but too well
       excuse, and disappointed by the refusal of her expected wages, the nurse
       was launching forth in recriminations, threats, and abuse. In spite of
       myself, I listened to the quarrel, not daring to interfere, and not
       thinking of going away, when Michael Arout appeared at the shop-door.

       The joiner had just come from the Barriers, where he had passed part of
       the day at a public-house. His blouse, without a belt, and untied at the
       throat, showed none of the noble stains of work: in his hand he held his
       cap, which he had just picked up out of the mud; his hair was in
       disorder, his eye fixed, and the pallor of drunkenness in his face. He
       came reeling in, looked wildly around him, and called Genevieve.

       She heard his voice, gave a start, and rushed into the shop; but at the
       sight of the miserable man, who was trying in vain to steady himself, she
       pressed the child in her arms, and bent over it with tears.

       The countrywoman and the neighbor had followed her.

       "Come! come!" cried the former in a rage, "do you intend to pay me,
       after all?"

       "Ask the master for the money," ironically answered the woman from the
       next door, pointing to the joiner, who had just fallen against the
       counter.

       The countrywoman looked at him.

       "Ah! he is the father," returned she. "Well, what idle beggars! not to
       have a penny to pay honest people; and get tipsy with wine in that way."

       The drunkard raised his head.

       "What! what!" stammered he; "who is it that talks of wine? I've had
       nothing but brandy! But I am going back again to get some wine! Wife,
       give me your money; there are some friends waiting for me at the 'Pere
       la Tuille'."

       Genevieve did not answer: he went round the counter, opened the till, and
       began to rummage in it.

       "You see where the money of the house goes!" observed the neighbor to
       the countrywoman; "how can the poor unhappy woman pay you when he takes
       all?"

       "Is that my fault?" replied the nurse, angrily. "They owe to me, and
       somehow or other they must pay me!"

       And letting loose her tongue, as these women out of the country do, she
       began relating at length all the care she had taken of the child, and all
       the expense it had been to her. In proportion as she recalled all she
       had done, her words seemed to convince her more than ever of her rights,
       and to increase her anger. The poor mother, who no doubt feared that her
       violence would frighten the child, returned into the back shop, and put
       it into its cradle.

       Whether it is that the countrywoman saw in this act a determination to
       escape her claims, or that she was blinded by passion, I cannot say; but
       she rushed into the next room, where I heard the sounds of quarrelling,
       with which the cries of the child were soon mingled. The joiner, who was
       still rummaging in the till, was startled, and raised his head.

       At the same moment Genevieve appeared at the door, holding in her arms
       the baby that the countrywoman was trying to tear from her. She ran
       toward the counter, and throwing herself behind her husband, cried:

       "Michael, defend your son!"

       The drunken man quickly stood up erect, like one who awakes with a start.

       "My son!" stammered he; "what son?"

       His looks fell upon the child; a vague ray of intelligence passed over
       his features.

       "Robert," resumed he; "it is Robert!"

       He tried to steady himself on his feet, that he might take the baby, but
       he tottered. The nurse approached him in a rage.

       "My money, or I shall take the child away!" cried she. "It is I who
       have fed and brought it up: if you don't pay me for what has made it
       live, it ought to be the same to you as if it were dead. I shall not go
       until I have my due, or the baby."

       "And what would you do with him?" murmured Genevieve, pressing Robert
       against her bosom.

       "Take it to the Foundling!" replied the countrywoman, harshly; "the
       hospital is a better mother than you are, for it pays for the food of its
       little ones."

       At the word "Foundling," Genevieve had exclaimed aloud in horror. With
       her arms wound round her son, whose head she hid in her bosom, and her
       two hands spread over him, she had retreated to the wall, and remained
       with her back against it, like a lioness defending her young. The
       neighbor and I contemplated this scene, without knowing how we could
       interfere. As for Michael, he looked at us by turns, making a visible
       effort to comprehend it all. When his eye rested upon Genevieve and the
       child, it lit up with a gleam of pleasure; but when he turned toward us,
       he again became stupid and hesitating.

       At last, apparently making a prodigious effort, he cried out, "Wait!"

       And going to a tub filled with water, he plunged his face into it several
       times.

       Every eye was turned upon him; the countrywoman herself seemed
       astonished. At length he raised his dripping head. This ablution had
       partly dispelled his drunkenness; he looked at us for a moment, then he
       turned to Genevieve, and his face brightened up.

       "Robert!" cried he, going up to the child, and taking him in his arms.
       "Ah! give him me, wife; I must look at him."

       The mother seemed to give up his son to him with reluctance, and stayed
       before him with her arms extended, as if she feared the child would have
       a fall. The nurse began again in her turn to speak, and renewed her
       claims, this time threatening to appeal to law. At first Michael
       listened to her attentively, and when he comprehended her meaning, he
       gave the child back to its mother.

       "How much do we owe you?" asked he.

       The countrywoman began to reckon up the different expenses, which
       amounted to nearly thirty francs. The joiner felt to the bottom of his
       pockets, but could find nothing. His forehead became contracted by
       frowns; low curses began to escape him. All of a sudden he rummaged in
       his breast, drew forth a large watch, and holding it up above his head:

       "Here it is--here's your money!" cried he with a joyful laugh; "a watch,
       a good one! I always said it would keep for a drink on a dry day; but it
       is not I who will drink it, but the young one. Ah! ah! ah! go and sell
       it for me, neighbor, and if that is not enough, I have my earrings. Eh!
       Genevieve, take them off for me; the earrings will square all! They
       shall not say you have been disgraced on account of the child--no, not
       even if I must pledge a bit of my flesh! My watch, my earrings, and my
       ring--get rid of all of them for me at the goldsmith's; pay the woman,
       and let the little fool go to sleep. Give him me, Genevieve; I will put
       him to bed."

       And, taking the baby from the arms of his mother, he carried him with a
       firm step to his cradle.

       It was easy to perceive the change which took place in Michael from this
       day. He cut all his old drinking acquaintances. He went early every
       morning to his work, and returned regularly in the evening to finish the
       day with Genevieve and Robert. Very soon he would not leave them at all,
       and he hired a place near the fruit-shop, and worked in it on his own
       account.

       They would soon have been able to live in comfort, had it not been for
       the expenses which the child required. Everything was given up to his
       education. He had gone through the regular school training, had studied
       mathematics, drawing, and the carpenter's trade, and had only begun to
       work a few months ago. Till now, they had been exhausting every resource
       which their laborious industry could provide to push him forward in his
       business; and, happily, all these exertions had not proved useless: the
       seed had brought forth fruit, and the days of harvest were close by.

       While I was thus recalling these remembrances to my mind, Michael had
       come in, and was occupied in fixing shelves where they were wanted.

       During the time I was writing the notes of my journal, I was also
       scrutinizing the joiner.

       The excesses of his youth and the labor of his manhood have deeply marked
       his face; his hair is thin and gray, his shoulders stoop, his legs are
       shrunken and slightly bent. There seems a sort of weight in his whole
       being. His very features have an expression of sorrow and despondency.
       He answers my questions by monosyllables, and like a man who wishes to
       avoid conversation. Whence comes this dejection, when one would think he
       had all he could wish for? I should like to know!


       Ten o'clock.--Michael is just gone downstairs to look for a tool he has
       forgotten. I have at last succeeded in drawing from him the secret of
       his and Genevieve's sorrow. Their son Robert is the cause of it!

       Not that he has turned out ill after all their care--not that he is idle
       or dissipated; but both were in hopes he would never leave them any more.
       The presence of the young man was to have renewed and made glad their
       lives once more; his mother counted the days, his father prepared
       everything to receive their dear associate in their toils; and at the
       moment when they were thus about to be repaid for all their sacrifices,
       Robert had suddenly informed them that he had just engaged himself to a
       contractor at Versailles.

       Every remonstrance and every prayer were useless; he brought forward the
       necessity of initiating himself into all the details of an important
       contract, the facilities he should have in his new position of improving
       himself in his trade, and the hopes he had of turning his knowledge to
       advantage. At, last, when his mother, having come to the end of her
       arguments, began to cry, he hastily kissed her, and went away that he
       might avoid any further remonstrances.

       He had been absent a year, and there was nothing to give them hopes of
       his return. His parents hardly saw him once a month, and then he only
       stayed a few moments with them.

       "I have been punished where I had hoped to be rewarded," Michael said to
       me just now. "I had wished for a saving and industrious son, and God has
       given me an ambitious and avaricious one! I had always said to myself
       that when once he was grown up we should have him always with us, to
       recall our youth and to enliven our hearts. His mother was always
       thinking of getting him married, and having children again to care for.
       You know women always will busy themselves about others. As for me, I
       thought of him working near my bench, and singing his new songs; for he
       has learnt music, and is one of the best singers at the Orpheon.

       A dream, sir, truly! Directly the bird was fledged, he took to flight,
       and remembers neither father nor mother. Yesterday, for instance, was
       the day we expected him; he should have come to supper with us. No
       Robert to-day, either! He has had some plan to finish, or some bargain
       to arrange, and his old parents are put down last in the accounts, after
       the customers and the joiner's work. Ah! if I could have guessed how it
       would have turned out! Fool! to have sacrificed my likings and my money,
       for nearly twenty years, to the education of a thankless son! Was it for
       this I took the trouble to cure myself of drinking, to break with my
       friends, to become an example to the neighborhood? The jovial good
       fellow has made a goose of himself. Oh! if I had to begin again! No,
       no! you see women and children are our bane. They soften our hearts;
       they lead us a life of hope and affection; we pass a quarter of our lives
       in fostering the growth of a grain of corn which is to be everything to
       us in our old age, and when the harvest-time comes--good-night, the ear
       is empty!"

       While he was speaking, Michael's voice became hoarse, his eyes fierce,
       and his lips quivered. I wished to answer him, but I could only think of
       commonplace consolations, and I remained silent. The joiner pretended he
       needed a tool, and left me.

       Poor father! Ah! I know those moments of temptation when virtue has
       failed to reward us, and we regret having obeyed her! Who has not felt
       this weakness in hours of trial, and who has not uttered, at least once,
       the mournful exclamation of Brutus?

       But if virtue is only a word, what is there then in life that is true
       and real? No, I will not believe that goodness is in vain! It does not
       always give the happiness we had hoped for, but it brings some other.
       In the world everything is ruled by order, and has its proper and
       necessary consequences, and virtue cannot be the sole exception to the
       general law. If it had been prejudicial to those who practised it,
       experience would have avenged them; but experience has, on the contrary,
       made it more universal and more holy. We only accuse it of being a
       faithless debtor because we demand an immediate payment, and one apparent
       to our senses. We always consider life as a fairytale, in which every
       good action must be rewarded by a visible wonder. We do not accept as
       payment a peaceful conscience, self-content, or a good name among men--
       treasures that are more precious than any other, but the value of which
       we do not feel till after we have lost them!

       Michael is come back, and has returned to his work. His son has not yet
       arrived.

       By telling me of his hopes and his grievous disappointments, he became
       excited; he unceasingly went over again the same subject, always adding
       something to his griefs. He had just wound up his confidential discourse
       by speaking to me of a joiner's business which he had hoped to buy, and
       work to good account with Robert's help. The present owner had made a
       fortune by it, and, after thirty years of business, he was thinking of
       retiring to one of the ornamental cottages in the outskirts of the city,
       a usual retreat for the frugal and successful workingman. Michael had
       not indeed the two thousand francs which must be paid down; but perhaps
       he could have persuaded Master Benoit to wait. Robert's presence would
       have been a security for him, for the young man could not fail to insure
       the prosperity of a workshop; besides science and skill, he had the power
       of invention and bringing to perfection. His father had discovered among
       his drawings a new plan for a staircase, which had occupied his thoughts
       for a long time; and he even suspected him of having engaged himself to
       the Versailles contractor for the very purpose of executing it. The
       youth was tormented by this spirit of invention, which took possession of
       all his thoughts, and, while devoting his mind to study, he had no time
       to listen to his feelings.

       Michael told me all this with a mixed feeling of pride and vexation. I
       saw he was proud of the son he was abusing, and that his very pride made
       him more sensitive to that son's neglect.


       Six o'clock P.M.--I have just finished a happy day. How many events have
       happened within a few hours, and what a change for Genevieve and Michael!

       He had just finished fixing the shelves, and telling me of his son, while
       I laid the cloth for my breakfast.

       Suddenly we heard hurried steps in the passage, the door opened, and
       Genevieve entered with Robert.

       The joiner gave a start of joyful surprise, but he repressed it
       immediately, as if he wished to keep up the appearance of displeasure.

       The young man did not appear to notice it, but threw himself into his
       arms in an open-hearted manner, which surprised me. Genevieve, whose
       face shone with happiness, seemed to wish to speak, and to restrain
       herself with difficulty.

       I told Robert I was glad to see him, and he answered me with ease and
       civility.

       "I expected you yesterday," said Michael Arout, rather dryly.

       "Forgive me, father," replied the young workman, "but I had business at
       St. Germain's. I was not able to come back till it was very late, and
       then the master kept me."

       The joiner looked at his son sidewise, and then took up his hammer again.

       "All right," muttered he, in a grumbling tone; "when we are with other
       people we must do as they wish; but there are some who would like better
       to eat brown bread with their own knife than partridges with the silver
       fork of a master."

       "And I am one of those, father," replied Robert, merrily, "but, as the
       proverb says, "you must shell the peas before you can eat them." It was
       necessary that I should first work in a great workshop--"

       "To go on with your plan of the staircase," interrupted Michael,
       ironically.

       "You must now say Monsieur Raymond's plan, father," replied Robert,
       smiling.

       "Why?"

       "Because I have sold it to him."

       The joiner, who was planing a board, turned round quickly.

       "Sold it!" cried he, with sparkling eyes.

       "For the reason that I was not rich enough to give it him."

       Michael threw down the board and tool.

       "There he is again!" resumed he, angrily; "his good genius puts an idea
       into his head which would have made him known, and he goes and sells it
       to a rich man, who will take the honor of it himself."

       "Well, what harm is there done?" asked Genevieve.

       "What harm!" cried the joiner, in a passion. "You understand nothing
       about it--you are a woman; but he--he knows well that a true workman
       never gives up his own inventions for money, no more than a soldier would
       give up his cross. That is his glory; he is bound to keep it for the
       honor it does him! Ah, thunder! if I had ever made a discovery, rather
       than put it up at auction I would have sold one of my eyes! Don't you
       see that a new invention is like a child to a workman? He takes care of
       it, he brings it up, he makes a way for it in the world, and it is only a
       poor creature who sells it."

       Robert colored a little.

       "You will think differently, father," said he, "when you know why I sold
       my plan."

       "Yes, and you will thank him for it," added Genevieve, who could no
       longer keep silence.

       "Never !" replied Michael.

       "But, wretched man!" cried she, "he sold it only for our sakes!"

       The joiner looked at his wife and son with astonishment. It was
       necessary to come to an explanation. The latter related how he had
       entered into a negotiation with Master Benoit, who had positively refused
       to sell his business unless one half of the two thousand francs were
       first paid down. It was in the hopes of obtaining this sum that he had
       gone to work with the contractor at Versailles; he had had an opportunity
       of trying his invention, and of finding a purchaser. Thanks to the money
       he received for it, he had just concluded the bargain with Benoit, and
       had brought his father the key of the new work-yard.

       This explanation was given by the young workman with so much modesty and
       simplicity that I was quite affected by it. Genevieve cried; Michael
       pressed his son to his heart, and in a long embrace he seemed to ask his
       pardon for having unjustly accused him.

       All was now explained with honor to Robert. The conduct which his
       parents had ascribed to indifference really sprang from affection; he had
       neither obeyed the voice of ambition nor of avarice, nor even the nobler
       inspiration of inventive genius: his whole motive and single aim had been
       the happiness of Genevieve and Michael. The day for proving his
       gratitude had come, and he had returned them sacrifice for sacrifice!

       After the explanations and exclamations of joy were over, all three were
       about to leave me; but, the cloth being laid, I added three more places,
       and kept them to breakfast.

       The meal was prolonged: the fare was only tolerable; but the over-
       flowings of affection made it delicious. Never had I better understood
       the unspeakable charm of family love. What calm enjoyment in that
       happiness which is always shared with others; in that community of
       interests which unites such various feelings; in that association of
       existences which forms one single being of so many! What is man without
       those home affections, which, like so many roots, fix him firmly in the
       earth, and permit him to imbibe all the juices of life? Energy,
       happiness--do not all these come from them? Without family life where
       would man learn to love, to associate, to deny himself? A community in
       little, is it not this which teaches us how to live in the great one?
       Such is the holiness of home, that, to express our relation with God, we
       have been obliged to borrow the words invented for our family life. Men
       have named themselves the sons of a heavenly Father!

       Ah! let us carefully preserve these chains of domestic union. Do not
       let us unbind the human sheaf, and scatter its ears to all the caprices
       of chance and of the winds; but let us rather enlarge this holy law; let
       us carry the principles and the habits of home beyond set bounds; and,
       if it may be, let us realize the prayer of the Apostle of the Gentiles
       when he exclaimed to the newborn children of Christ: "Be ye like-minded,
       having the same love, being of one accord, of one mind."




       ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

       Always to mistake feeling for evidence
       Fame and power are gifts that are dearly bought
       Fortune sells what we believe she gives
       Make himself a name: he becomes public property
       My patronage has become her property
       Not desirous to teach goodness
       Power of necessity
       Progress can never be forced on without danger
       So much confidence at first, so much doubt at las
       The man in power gives up his peace
       Virtue made friends, but she did not take pupils
       We are not bound to live, while we are bound to do our duty










       AN "ATTIC" PHILOSOPHER
       (Un Philosophe sous les Toits)

       By EMILE SOUVESTRE



       BOOK 3.


       CHAPTER X

       OUR COUNTRY

       October 12th, Seven O'clock A.M.

       The nights are already become cold and long; the sun, shining through my
       curtains, no more wakens me long before the hour for work; and even when
       my eyes are open, the pleasant warmth of the bed keeps me fast under my
       counterpane. Every morning there begins a long argument between my
       activity and my indolence; and, snugly wrapped up to the eyes, I wait
       like the Gascon, until they have succeeded in coming to an agreement.

       This morning, however, a light, which shone from my door upon my pillow,
       awoke me earlier than usual. In vain I turned on my side; the
       persevering light, like a victorious enemy, pursued me into every
       position. At last, quite out of patience, I sat up and hurled my
       nightcap to the foot of the bed!

       (I will observe, by way of parenthesis, that the various evolutions of
       this pacific headgear seem to have been, from the remotest time, symbols
       of the vehement emotions of the mind; for our language has borrowed its
       most common images from them.)

       But be this as it may, I got up in a very bad humor, grumbling at my new
       neighbor, who took it into his head to be wakeful when I wished to sleep.
       We are all made thus; we do not understand that others may live on their
       own account. Each one of us is like the earth, according to the old
       system of Ptolemy, and thinks he can have the whole universe revolve
       around himself. On this point, to make use of the metaphor alluded to:
       'Tous les hommes ont la tete dans le meme bonnet'.

       I had for the time being, as I have already said, thrown mine to the
       other end of my bed; and I slowly disengaged my legs from the warm
       bedclothes, while making a host of evil reflections upon the
       inconvenience of having neighbors.

       For more than a month I had not had to complain of those whom chance had
       given me; most of them only came in to sleep, and went away again on
       rising. I was almost always alone on this top story--alone with the
       clouds and the sparrows!

       But at Paris nothing lasts; the current of life carries us along, like
       the seaweed torn from the rock; the houses are vessels which take mere
       passengers. How many different faces have I already seen pass along the
       landing-place belonging to our attics! How many companions of a few days
       have disappeared forever! Some are lost in that medley of the living
       which whirls continually under the scourge of necessity, and others in
       that resting-place of the dead, who sleep under the hand of God!

       Peter the bookbinder is one of these last. Wrapped up in selfishness, he
       lived alone and friendless, and he died as he had lived. His loss was
       neither mourned by any one, nor disarranged anything in the world; there
       was merely a ditch filled up in the graveyard, and an attic emptied in
       our house.

       It is the same which my new neighbor has inhabited for the last few days.

       To say truly (now that I am quite awake, and my ill humor is gone with my
       nightcap)--to say truly, this new neighbor, although rising earlier than
       suits my idleness, is not the less a very good man: he carries his
       misfortunes, as few know how to carry their good fortunes, with
       cheerfulness and moderation.

       But fate has cruelly tried him. Father Chaufour is but the wreck of a
       man. In the place of one of his arms hangs an empty sleeve; his left leg
       is made by the turner, and he drags the right along with difficulty; but
       above these ruins rises a calm and happy face. While looking upon his
       countenance, radiant with a serene energy, while listening to his voice,
       the tone of which has, so to speak, the accent of goodness, we see that
       the soul has remained entire in the half-destroyed covering. The
       fortress is a little damaged, as Father Chaufour says, but the garrison
       is quite hearty.

       Decidedly, the more I think of this excellent man, the more I reproach
       myself for the sort of malediction I bestowed on him when I awoke.

       We are generally too indulgent in our secret wrongs toward our neighbor.
       All ill-will which does not pass the region of thought seems innocent to
       us, and, with our clumsy justice, we excuse without examination the sin
       which does not betray itself by action!

       But are we then bound to others only by the enforcement of laws? Besides
       these external relations, is there not a real relation of feeling between
       men? Do we not owe to all those who live under the same heaven as
       ourselves the aid not only of our acts but of our purposes? Ought not
       every human life to be to us like a vessel that we accompany with our
       prayers for a happy voyage? It is not enough that men do not harm one
       another; they must also help and love one another! The papal
       benediction, 'Urbi et orbi'! should be the constant cry from all hearts.
       To condemn him who does not deserve it, even in the mind, even by a
       passing thought, is to break the great law, that which has established
       the union of souls here below, and to which Christ has given the sweet
       name of charity.

       These thoughts came into my mind as I finished dressing, and I said to
       myself that Father Chaufour had a right to reparation from me. To make
       amends for the feeling of ill-will I had against him just now, I owed him
       some explicit proof of sympathy. I heard him humming a tune in his room;
       he was at work, and I determined that I would make the first neighborly
       call.


       Eight o'clock P.M.--I found Father Chaufour at a table lighted by a
       little smoky lamp, without a fire, although it is already cold, and
       making large pasteboard boxes; he was humming a popular song in a low
       tone. I had hardly entered the room when he uttered an exclamation of
       surprise and pleasure.

       "Eh! is it you, neighbor? Come in, then! I did not think you got up so
       early, so I put a damper on my music; I was afraid of waking you."

       Excellent man! while I was sending him to the devil he was putting
       himself out of his way for me!

       This thought touched me, and I paid my compliments on his having become
       my neighbor with a warmth which opened his heart.

       "Faith! you seem to me to have the look of a good Christian," said he in
       a voice of soldierlike cordiality, and shaking me by the hand. "I do not
       like those people who look on a landing-place as a frontier line, and
       treat their neighbors as if they were Cossacks. When men snuff the same
       air, and speak the same lingo, they are not meant to turn their backs to
       each other. Sit down there, neighbor; I don't mean to order you; only
       take care of the stool; it has but three legs, and we must put good-will
       in place of the fourth."

       "It seems that that is a treasure which there is no want of here," I
       observed.

       "Good-will!" repeated Chaufour; "that is all my mother left me, and I
       take it no son has received a better inheritance. Therefore they used to
       call me Monsieur Content in the batteries."

       "You are a soldier, then?"

       "I served in the Third Artillery under the Republic, and afterward in the
       Guard, through all the commotions. I was at Jemappes and at Waterloo; so
       I was at the christening and at the burial of our glory, as one may say!"

       I looked at him with astonishment.

       "And how old were you then, at Jemappes?" asked I.

       "Somewhere about fifteen," said he.

       "How came you to think of being a soldier so early?"

       "I did not really think about it. I then worked at toy-making, and never
       dreamed that France would ask me for anything else than to make her
       draught-boards, shuttlecocks, and cups and balls. But I had an old uncle
       at Vincennes whom I went to see from time to time--a Fontenoy veteran in
       the same rank of life as myself, but with ability enough to have risen to
       that of a marshal. Unluckily, in those days there was no way for common
       people to get on. My uncle, whose services would have got him made a
       prince under the other, had then retired with the mere rank of sub-
       lieutenant. But you should have seen him in his uniform, his cross of
       St. Louis, his wooden leg, his white moustaches, and his noble
       countenance. You would have said he was a portrait of one of those old
       heroes in powdered hair which are at Versailles!

       "Every time I visited him, he said something which remained fixed in my
       memory. But one day I found him quite grave.

       "'Jerome,' said he, 'do you know what is going on on the frontier?'

       "'No, lieutenant,' replied I.

       "'Well,' resumed he, 'our country is in danger!'

       "I did not well understand him, and yet it seemed something to me.

       "'Perhaps you have never thought what your country means,' continued he,
       placing his hand on my shoulder; `it is all that surrounds you, all that
       has brought you up and fed you, all that you have loved! This ground
       that you see, these houses, these trees, those girls who go along there
       laughing--this is your country! The laws which protect you, the bread
       which pays for your work, the words you interchange with others, the joy
       and grief which come to you from the men and things among which you live
       --this is your country! The little room where you used to see your
       mother, the remembrances she has left you, the earth where she rests--
       this is your country! You see it, you breathe it, everywhere! Think to
       yourself, my son, of your rights and your duties, your affections and
       your wants, your past and your present blessings; write them all under a
       single name--and that name will be your country!'

       "I was trembling with emotion, and great tears were in my eyes.

       "'Ah! I understand,' cried I; 'it is our home in large; it is that part
       of the world where God has placed our body and our soul.'

       "'You are right, Jerome,' continued the old soldier; 'so you comprehend
       also what we owe it.'

       "'Truly,' resumed I, 'we owe it all that we are; it is a question of
       love.'

       "'And of honesty, my son,' concluded he. 'The member of a family who
       does not contribute his share of work and of happiness fails in his duty,
       and is a bad kinsman; the member of a partnership who does not enrich it
       with all his might, with all his courage, and with all his heart,
       defrauds it of what belongs to it, and is a dishonest man. It is the
       same with him who enjoys the advantages of having a country, and does not
       accept the burdens of it; he forfeits his honor, and is a bad citizen!'

       "'And what must one do, lieutenant, to be a good citizen?' asked I.

       "'Do for your country what you would do for your father and mother,' said
       he.

       "I did not answer at the moment; my heart was swelling, and the blood
       boiling in my veins; but on returning along the road, my uncle's words
       were, so to speak, written up before my eyes. I repeated, 'Do for your
       country what you would do for your father and mother.' And my country is
       in danger; an enemy attacks it, while I--I turn cups and balls!

       "This thought tormented me so much all night that the next day I returned
       to Vincennes to announce to the lieutenant that I had just enlisted, and
       was going off to the frontier. The brave man pressed upon me his cross
       of St. Louis, and I went away as proud as an ambassador.

       "That is how, neighbor, I became a volunteer under the Republic before I
       had cut my wisdom teeth."

       All this was told quietly, and in the cheerful spirit of him who looks
       upon an accomplished duty neither as a merit nor a grievance.

       While he spoke, Father Chaufour grew animated, not on account of himself,
       but of the general subject. Evidently that which occupied him in the
       drama of life was not his own part, but the drama itself.

       This sort of disinterestedness touched me. I prolonged my visit, and
       showed myself as frank as possible, in order to win his confidence in
       return. In an hour's time he knew my position and my habits; I was on
       the footing of an old acquaintance.

       I even confessed the ill-humor the light of his lamp put me into a short
       time before. He took what I said with the touching cheerfulness which
       comes from a heart in the right place, and which looks upon everything on
       the good side. He neither spoke to me of the necessity which obliged him
       to work while I could sleep, nor of the deprivations of the old soldier
       compared to the luxury of the young clerk; he only struck his forehead,
       accused himself of thoughtlessness, and promised to put list round his
       door!

       O great and beautiful soul! with whom nothing turns to bitterness, and
       who art peremptory only in duty and benevolence!


       October 15th.--This morning I was looking at a little engraving I had
       framed myself, and hung over my writing-table; it is a design of
       Gavarni's; in which, in a grave mood, he has represented a veteran and a
       conscript.

       By often contemplating these two figures, so different in expression, and
       so true to life, both have become living in my eyes; I have seen them
       move, I have heard them speak; the picture has become a real scene, at
       which I am present as spectator.

       The veteran advances slowly, his hand leaning on the shoulder of the
       young soldier. His eyes, closed for ever, no longer perceive the sun
       shining through the flowering chestnut-trees. In the place of his right
       arm hangs an empty sleeve, and he walks with a wooden leg, the sound of
       which on the pavement makes those who pass turn to look.

       At the sight of this ancient wreck from our patriotic wars, the greater
       number shake their heads in pity, and I seem to hear a sigh or an
       imprecation.

       "See the worth of glory!" says a portly merchant, turning away his eyes
       in horror.

       "What a deplorable use of human life!" rejoins a young man who carries a
       volume of philosophy under his arm.

       "The trooper would better not have left his plow," adds a countryman,
       with a cunning air.

       "Poor old man!" murmurs a woman, almost crying.

       The veteran has heard, and he knits his brow; for it seems to him that
       his guide has grown thoughtful. The latter, attracted by what he hears
       around him, hardly answers the old man's questions, and his eyes, vaguely
       lost in space, seem to be seeking there for the solution of some problem.

       I seem to see a twitching in the gray moustaches of the veteran; he stops
       abruptly, and, holding back his guide with his remaining arm:

       "They all pity me," says he, "because they do not understand it; but if I
       were to answer them--"

       "What would you say to them, father?" asks the young man, with
       curiosity.

       "I should say first to the woman who weeps when she looks at me, to keep
       her tears for other misfortunes; for each of my wounds calls to mind some
       struggle for my colors. There is room for doubting how some men have
       done their duty; with me it is visible. I carry the account of my
       services, written with the enemy's steel and lead, on myself; to pity me
       for having done my duty is to suppose I would better have been false to
       it."

       "And what would you say to the countryman, father?"

       "I should tell him that, to drive the plow in peace, we must first secure
       the country itself; and that, as long as there are foreigners ready to
       eat our harvest, there must be arms to defend it."

       "But the young student, too, shook his head when he lamented such a use
       of life."

       "Because he does not know what self-sacrifice and suffering can teach.
       The books that he studies we have put in practice, though we never read
       them: the principles he applauds we have defended with powder and
       bayonet."

       "And at the price of your limbs and your blood. The merchant said, when
       he saw your maimed body, 'See the worth of glory!"'

       "Do not believe him, my son: the true glory is the bread of the soul; it
       is this which nourishes self-sacrifice, patience, and courage. The
       Master of all has bestowed it as a tie the more between men. When we
       desire to be distinguished by our brethren, do we not thus prove our
       esteem and our sympathy for them? The longing for admiration is but one
       side of love. No, no; the true glory can never be too dearly paid for!
       That which we should deplore, child, is not the infirmities which prove a
       generous self-sacrifice, but those which our vices or our imprudence have
       called forth. Ah! if I could speak aloud to those who, when passing,
       cast looks of pity upon me, I should say to the young man whose excesses
       have dimmed his sight before he is old, 'What have you done with your
       eyes?' To the slothful man, who with difficulty drags along his
       enervated mass of flesh, 'What have you done with your feet?' To the old
       man, who is punished for his intemperance by the gout, 'What have you
       done with your hands?' To all, 'What have you done with the days God
       granted you, with the faculties you should have employed for the good of
       your brethren?' If you cannot answer, bestow no more of your pity upon
       the old soldier maimed in his country's cause; for he--he at least--can
       show his scars without shame."


       October 16th.--The little engraving has made me comprehend better the
       merits of Father Chaufour, and I therefore esteem him all the more.

       He has just now left my attic. There no longer passes a single day
       without his coming to work by my fire, or my going to sit and talk by his
       board.

       The old artilleryman has seen much, and likes to tell of it. For twenty
       years he was an armed traveller throughout Europe, and he fought without
       hatred, for he was possessed by a single thought--the honor of the
       national flag! It might have been his superstition, if you will; but it
       was, at the same time, his safeguard.

       The word FRANCE, which was then resounding so gloriously through the
       world, served as a talisman to him against all sorts of temptation. To
       have to support a great name may seem a burden to vulgar minds, but it is
       an encouragement to vigorous ones.

       "I, too, have had many moments," said he to me the other day, "when I
       have been tempted to make friends with the devil. War is not precisely
       the school for rural virtues. By dint of burning, destroying, and
       killing, you grow a little tough as regards your feelings; 'and, when the
       bayonet has made you king, the notions of an autocrat come into your head
       a little strongly. But at these moments I called to mind that country
       which the lieutenant spoke of to me, and I whispered to myself the well-
       known phrase, 'Toujours Francais! It has been laughed at since. People
       who would make a joke of the death of their mother have turned it into
       ridicule, as if the name of our country was not also a noble and a
       binding thing. For my part, I shall never forget from how many follies
       the title of Frenchman has kept me. When, overcome with fatigue, I have
       found myself in the rear of the colors, and when the musketry was
       rattling in the front ranks, many a time I heard a voice, which whispered
       in my ear, 'Leave the others to fight, and for today take care of your
       own hide!' But then, that word Francais! murmured within me, and I
       pressed forward to help my comrades. At other times, when, irritated by
       hunger, cold, and wounds, I have arrived at the hovel of some Meinherr,
       I have been seized by an itching to break the master's back, and to burn
       his hut; but I whispered to myself, Francais! and this name would not
       rhyme with either incendiary or murderer. I have, in this way, passed
       through kingdoms from east to west, and from north to south, always
       determined not to bring disgrace upon my country's flag. The lieutenant,
       you see, had taught me a magic word--My country! Not only must we defend
       it, but we must also make it great and loved."


       October 17th.--To-day I have paid my neighbor a long visit. A chance
       expression led the way to his telling me more of himself than he had yet
       done.

       I asked him whether both his limbs had been lost in the same battle.

       "No, no!" replied he; "the cannon only took my leg; it was the Clamart
       quarries that my arm went to feed."

       And when I asked him for the particulars--

       "That's as easy as to say good-morning," continued he. "After the great
       break-up at Waterloo, I stayed three months in the camp hospital to give
       my wooden leg time to grow. As soon as I was able to hobble a little,
       I took leave of headquarters, and took the road to Paris, where I hoped
       to find some relative or friend; but no--all were gone, or underground.
       I should have found myself less strange at Vienna, Madrid, or Berlin.
       And although I had a leg the less to provide for, I was none the better
       off; my appetite had come back, and my last sous were taking flight.

       "I had indeed met my old colonel, who recollected that I had helped him
       out of the skirmish at Montereau by giving him my horse, and he had
       offered me bed and board at his house. I knew that the year before he
       had married a castle and no few farms, so that I might become permanent
       coat-brusher to a millionaire, which was not without its temptations.
       It remained to see if I had not anything better to do. One evening I set
       myself to reflect upon it.

       "'Let us see, Chaufour,' said I to myself; 'the question is to act like a
       man. The colonel's place suits you, but cannot you do anything better?
       Your body is still in good condition, and your arms strong; do you not
       owe all your strength to your country, as your Vincennes uncle said? Why
       not leave some old soldier, more cut up than you are, to get his hospital
       at the colonel's? Come, trooper, you are still fit for another stout
       charge or two! You must not lay up before your time.'

       "Whereupon I went to thank the colonel, and to offer my services to an
       old artilleryman, who had gone back to his home at Clamart, and who had
       taken up the quarryman's pick again.

       "For the first few months I played the conscript's part--that is to say,
       there was more stir than work; but with a good will one gets the better
       of stones, as of everything else. I did not become, so to speak, the
       leader of a column, but I brought up the rank among the good workmen,
       and I ate my bread with a good appetite, seeing I had earned it with a
       good will. For even underground, you see, I still kept my pride. The
       thought that I was working to do my part in changing rocks into houses
       pleased my heart. I said to myself, 'Courage, Chaufour, my old boy; you
       are helping to beautify your country.' And that kept up my spirit.

       "Unfortunately, some of my companions were rather too sensible to the
       charms of the brandy-bottle; so much so, that one day one of them, who
       could hardly distinguish his right hand from his left, thought proper to
       strike a light close to a charged mine. The mine exploded suddenly, and
       sent a shower of stone grape among us, which killed three men, and
       carried away the arm of which I have now only the sleeve."

       "So you were again without means of living?" said I to the old soldier.

       "That is to say, I had to change them," replied he, quietly. "The
       difficulty was to find one which would do with five fingers instead of
       ten; I found it, however."

       "How was that?"

       "Among the Paris street-sweepers."

       "What! you have been one--"

       "Of the pioneers of the health force for a while, neighbor, and that was
       not my worst time either. The corps of sweepers is not so low as it is
       dirty, I can tell you! There are old actresses in it who could never
       learn to save their money, and ruined merchants from the exchange; we
       even had a professor of classics, who for a little drink would recite
       Latin to you, or Greek tragedies, as you chose. They could not have
       competed for the Monthyon prize; but we excused faults on account of
       poverty, and cheered our poverty by our good-humor and jokes. I was as
       ragged and as cheerful as the rest, while trying to be something better.
       Even in the mire of the gutter I preserved my faith that nothing is
       dishonorable which is useful to our country.

       "'Chaufour,' said I to myself with a smile, 'after the sword, the hammer;
       after the hammer, the broom; you are going downstairs, my old boy, but
       you are still serving your country.'"

       "'However, you ended by leaving your new profession?' said I."

       "A reform was required, neighbor. The street-sweepers seldom have their
       feet dry, and the damp at last made the wounds in my good leg open again.
       I could no longer follow the regiment, and it was necessary to lay down
       my arms. It is now two months since I left off working in the sanitary
       department of Paris.

       "At the first moment I was daunted. Of my four limbs, I had now only my
       right hand, and even that had lost its strength; so it was necessary to
       find some gentlemanly occupation for it. After trying a little of
       everything, I fell upon card-box making, and here I am at cases for the
       lace and buttons of the national guard; it is work of little profit, but
       it is within the capacity of all. By getting up at four and working till
       eight, I earn sixty-five centimes; my lodging and bowl of soup take fifty
       of them, and there are three sous over for luxuries. So I am richer than
       France herself, for I have no deficit in my budget; and I continue to
       serve her, as I save her lace and buttons."

       At these words Father Chaufour looked at me with a smile, and with his
       great scissors began cutting the green paper again for his cardboard
       cases. My heart was touched, and I remained lost in thought.

       Here is still another member of that sacred phalanx who, in the battle of
       life, always march in front for the example and the salvation of the
       world! Each of these brave soldiers has his war-cry; for this one it is
       "Country," for that "Home," for a third "Mankind;" but they all follow
       the same standard--that of duty; for all the same divine law reigns--that
       of self-sacrifice. To love something more than one's self--that is the
       secret of all that is great; to know how to live for others--that is the
       aim of all noble souls.




       CHAPTER XI

       MORAL USE OF INVENTORIES

       November 13th, Nine O'clock P.M.

       I had well stopped up the chinks of my window; my little carpet was
       nailed down in its place; my lamp, provided with its shade, cast a
       subdued light around, and my stove made a low, murmuring sound, as if
       some live creature was sharing my hearth with me.

       All was silent around me. But, out of doors the snow and rain swept the



       


      Back to Full Books













